## Continuing Java

Java byte code - analogous to machine code. Encoding that Java Virtual Machine understands. You can compile on any system and it will work on any other computer because of JVM layer between the compiler and the code.

**Data Extraction**

This is where we create new classes and methods. OOP stuff...

Encapsulation: Hiding implementation details behind the programming language. We don't care about how the code is written, we just care about how it works, it should work when we call the method and may give it our data.

Google: Encapsulation is an Object Oriented Programming concept that binds together the data and functions that manipulate the data, and that keeps both safe from outside interference and misuse. Data encapsulation led to the important OOP concept of data hiding.

If we want to create a class called XYPoint:

- We have a constructor that takes two input parameters
- Two getter methods to retrieve from the object

```
XYPoint(int x, int y){
  int xPoint();
  int yPoint();
}
```
To call the object in java we would:

```
XYPoint xyp = new XYPoint(0 , 0);
```

Java would also initialize values if you dont specify, for e.g.:

```
XYPoint xpy2 = new XYPoint();
print xyp2.x
```
This will print 0 as the value is initialized unlike C.

In Java you dont have to de-allocate memory like C as it has a garbage collector.

---
*In C we would do the same as*

```
struct{
  int x;
  int y;
} * XYPoint;
```
In C we would have to use `malloc` to allocate memory to create a new object.

---

In Java if we have an array:

```
int a[];
for (int i =0; i < 10; i++){
  a[i] = 0;
}
```
This will throw a `RunTimeException` error as the array size is not declared. Should declare the array as `arrayRefVar = new dataType[arraySize];.`

---
*Power of Encapsulation*

API for `public class Date`:

```
public class Date{
Date(int mo, int day, int year)
int month(); // getter method
int day(); // getter method
int year(); // getter method
String toString(); // Overwrite default toString() method
                  //and provide custom implementation
}
```

Example implementation of the API:

```
public class Date{
  private final int month;
  private final int year;
  private final int day;

  public Date(int m, int d, int y){
    month = m;
    day = d;
    year = y;
  }

  int month(){
    return month;
  }

  int day(){
    return day;
  }

  int year(){
    return year;
  }

  String toString(){
    return month() + "\" + day() + "\" + year() + "\";
  }
}
```

If you have another class, you cannot access these `private` variables. `Final` is when we set it and never change it.

If we want to use just one integer to represent the date we have to create an encoding:

```
public class Date{
  private final int _date;

  /*
  We dont need 32 bits to represent number 0-31 for date
  Therefore we are shifting the year and month to fit all the date
  variables in just one _date variable
  */
  public Date(int m, int d, int y){
    _date = y * 512 + m * 32 + d;
  }

  int month(){
    return (_date/32)%16;
  }

  int day(){
    return _date%32;
  }

  int year(){
    return _date/512;
  }

  String toString(){
    return month() + "\" + day() + "\" + year() + "\";
  }
}
```

---
Mutable vs Immutable

Some data types are by nature mutable. For example string, if you alter a string a new string object is created. For example if you two strings:
`String a = "tiny"` and `String b = "cat"` and concat them using `a = a.concat(b)`. There are three string objects created here, at `a`, `b` and the last one when we concat it. Arrays are also mutable.

Mutable data types uses more memory as it forces to create a new object with every edit. We have to care about it and while writing code, if we dont want something from outside don't change our encapsulated value, we have to care about and make sure it doesn't happen. Advantage is that these data types are flexible and their values can easily be changed.

```
Public class Vector{

  private final double [] values;

  Public Vector(double [] myvals){
    value = myvals;
  }

}
```

As we said `final` it cannot be altered. Let's consider if we have the following code:

```
double [] ds = {3.0 ,4.0};
vector V  = new Vector(ds);
ds[0] = 0.0;
ds[1] = 0.0;
```
The vector may have the new values. So we intended to make our vector Immutable by saying `final`, but we just changed its values here to `0.0`. `final` says it will not change the value to where the array points, so it will point to the `ds` memory space. When we create our vector `V`, its values points to the same place as `ds` values.

To fix it, we create a new array inside the instance and copy it. Known as `defensive-copy` and therefore we will change our code to:

```
Public class Vector{

  private final double [] values;

  Public Vector(double [] myvals){
    value = new double [myvals.length()];
    for (int i = 0; i < myvals.length(); i++){
      value[i] = myvals[i];
    }
  }

}
```

As the size of your data grows the execution time grows linearly, as you will need a copy of the array (in our case).

---

**Implementation of inheritance**

Java provides two types of implementation inheritance:

1. Sub classing
  -The notion of object inheritance. If you have parent object for e.g. `animal` and a sub-class `cat.` It inheritance all the properties of `animal` but it will also have its own properties.
  -In Java we use `extends` keyword to tell a class inherits from its superclass.

  *What You Can Do in a Subclass*

  A subclass inherits all of the public and protected members of its parent, no matter what package the subclass is in. If the subclass is in the same package as its parent, it also inherits the package-private members of the parent. You can use the inherited members as is, replace them, hide them, or supplement them with new members:

  - The inherited fields can be used directly, just like any - other fields.
  -  You can declare a field in the subclass with the same name as the one in the superclass, thus hiding it (not recommended).
  - You can declare new fields in the subclass that are not in the superclass.
  - The inherited methods can be used directly as they are.
  - You can write a new instance method in the subclass that has the same signature as the one in the superclass, thus overriding it.
  - You can write a new static method in the subclass that has the same signature as the one in the superclass, thus hiding it.
  - You can declare new methods in the subclass that are not in the superclass.
  - You can write a subclass constructor that invokes the - constructor of the superclass, either implicitly or by using the keyword super.
  
2. Sub typing
  -Its an alternative to inheritance in Java. Instead of inherit the properties and methods of a parent class, it allows us to inherit a relationship.
  -One can take unrelated classes and define a relationship.
  -For example if we have `animals` and `spaceships`. And we want to say they both require fuel, we can define a method `consume` which will be an `interface` in Java.
  -We use the `implements` keyword to sub type from a different class.
```
  Public interface Eater(){
    consume();
  }
```

*Inheriting from a base class*

- class getClass(); - This will return an object of the class itself.
- boolean equals(object); - Recieves an object and checks equality
- String toString(); - Prints out JavaEncoded string for the name if the datatype provide is not string.
- int hashCode(); - returns an integer, used for hashing
